Steve stories. My name is Steve Fletcher and in 1990 I founded Swickr Carnival who have
organised Cardiff Carnival ever since. Steve story number seven. Cardiff Carnival finales
on the steps of the National Museum of Wales. The highlight of every Cardiff Carnival over
the past 25 years has been a spectacular costume parade featuring hundreds of flamboyant paraders,
dancers and street musicians. However, over the years once the parade has finished there have
been various opportunities to present finales in different locations around the city.
In the mid 1990s the Carnival camp was hosted at Cateys Youth Centre and the parade route included
passing through the Civic Centre, past the doors of the Welsh office which was then the seat of
government in Wales. The site chosen for the finale presentation of the Carnival after the parade
was the steps of the National Museum of Wales. The various landings, levels and ledges of these
massive steps offered multiple layers of stages and platforms on which to perform and present
all the many different costumes and dance groups with great sight lines for our family audiences.
Here against the background of the Museum's towering classical pillars and overhanging ornate
portico, Cardiff Carnival would culminate with a crescendo of massed performance, dance, drumming
and singing. However, our first use of the National Steps Museum steps for the 1993 Cardiff Carnival
which was called Nightmass was almost the last. A key part of that year's finale presentation
involved a dramatic fight between good and evil. A troop of horned and leering, blood-red, body
painted devils were armed with powerful pump-action water pistols filled to the brim with scarlet dye.
Their adversaries were a group of singing and dancing angels with large wings
all dressed in purest white. So as the sun began to set the devils proceeded to attack the angels
and appear to mercilessly slaughter them all. The angels' glowing white costumes were completely
splattered with fake blood and they collapsed to the floor, much to the horror of our audience.
Naturally the angel dancers were shortly resurrected, symbolizing the triumph of good over evil,
much to the relief of the younger children in the audience in particular.
However, the horror for me was not over. As the next day while passing the steps on the way to
help with the get out at the carnival camp I realized that the museum steps themselves
were still splattered with fake blood now disastrously absorbed into the stonework itself.
So whilst our earlier dress rehearsal on the steps had gone smoothly and stain free,
it was the case that one over enthusiastic devil had mixed a blood-red dye of a stronger brew.
Our agreement with the National Museum of Wales was that the steps would be returned as found,
not tappled with fake blood. Fortunately the museum director kindly agreed to wait three months
to see if the stained steps reverted to their original condition and, as luck would have it,
lashings of Welsh rain did indeed remove the offending red coloring and all was forgiven.
As part of these finale presentations on the museum steps there would be fireworks and
pyrotechnic special effects including smoke bombs of every color and the very last moments of the
finale would be marked by the title of that year's carnival picked out in giant fiery letters
up on high on the portico roof. These fiery words marked the very last moment of that year's carnival
and were the cue for all of the hundreds of costumed carnival revelers to return to the
steps for a final dance and drum whilst the very large family audiences which were normally over
5,000 strong went absolutely crazy and showed their appreciation the best way possible by
cheering, whistling, clapping and whooping until the last firework had burnt out and darkness
resumed.